First cut at threat model. (#123)
tfpauly/draft-pauly-adaptive-dns-privacy: draft-pauly-add-requirements.md

1. Encrypted resolver discovery: Discover encrypted resolvers equivalent to (or associated with) unencrypted resolvers.
Examples include network-provisioned, client-selected, and VPN-configured resolvers.
2. Domain-specific encrypted resolver discovery: Discover encrypted resolvers applicable to a limited set of domains.
Examples include resolvers for enterprise or private names, local content, and CDN content.

Encrypted resolver discovery mechanisms can either add new parameters to existing provisioning
mechanisms (adding necessary information to use DoT or DoH to options in DHCP, RAs, or IKEv2) or else provide a way
to communicate with a provisioned unencrypted DNS resolver and discover the equivalent or associated encrypted
DNS resolver.

Domain-specific encrypted resolver discovery mechanisms additionally need to provide some information about the
applicability and capabilities of encrypted resolvers. This information could either be provisioned,
or be discovered based on clients actively trying to access content.

# Privacy and security requirements {#priv-sec}

A primary goal of encrypted DNS is improving the privacy and security of DNS queries and answers in the presence

> of malicious attackers. Such attackers are assumed to interfere with or otherwise impede DNS traffic and corresponding

Reviewer: Is this the right attacker to focus on? I think there are a couple different attacks:
- Attacker (may be off-path) monitors you by observing your unencrypted DNS traffic to profile you
- On-path attacker modifies your unencrypted DNS traffic to mess with you
- On-path attacker blocks encrypted DNS connections

Attacks about redirecting encrypted DNS traffic might actually be the second case—not blocking, but changing.

Author: What I tried to capture was an adversary whose capabilities encompass all of the above: it is everywhere (on-path and off-path) and active. It's true that the attacker may have different goals given these capabilities. Let me take another cut at that.

of encrypted resolvers. This information could either be provisioned,
Domain-specific encrypted resolver discovery mechanisms additionally need to provide some information about the
applicability and capabilities of encrypted resolvers. This information could either be provisioned,
or be discovered based on clients actively trying to access content.

# Privacy and security requirements {#priv-sec}

Since one of the main reasons for enabling encrypted DNS on clients is to improve the privacy and security properties
of DNS queries, discovery mechanisms must be designed carefully to not weaken a client's security or privacy.
A primary goal of encrypted DNS is improving the privacy and security of DNS queries and answers in the presence
of malicious attackers. Such attackers are assumed to interfere with or otherwise impede DNS traffic and corresponding
discovery mechanisms, in any way possible, in an attempt to prevent usage of encrypted DNS. For example, an attacker
may block connectivity to a resolver chosen by the user. Clients MUST treat the network as such an attacker unless given
some means of authenticating or otherwise trusting the network.

> - Clients are always responsible for selecting which resolver(s) to use. Standards describing resolver discovery

Reviewer: I don't think we should lose these points. These are important for the conversation and come from MT's email points.

Reviewer: I guess that's covered as "Override or adversely influence client resolver selection by users or administrators"? Seems a bit less clear?

Author: Yeah, I rephrased it in that bullet. Saying that clients get to pick at the end of the day is table stakes, and it seems the attacker should never be able to change that. (Hence why I wrote it this way.)

> - Cause clients to use a discovered resolver which has no trust association with a client-known entity.

Reviewer: I think it's still important to include the term "authentication" here?

Author: Hmm, let me take another stab at this.

and the content provider, assuming that the content provider would already see the names upon a secure connection
later being made based on the DNS answers (e.g., in the TLS SNI extension)

# Discovery mechanisms {#mechanisms}

The use cases described in {{use-cases}} do not all necessarily require separate mechanisms.

Generally, the use cases can be summarized in two categories:

> 1. Encrypted resolver discovery: Discover encrypted resolvers equivalent to (or associated with) unencrypted resolvers.

Reviewer: I think "encrypted resolver discovery" is too broad here. That's not the sub-category, that's the overall document! Instead, this one is specifically about resolved equivalent to/associated with known resolvers.

Author: Maybe "associated encrypted resolver discovery"? (Associated to and equivalent are somewhat vague as well, so I'm not sure how to sharpen this.)

> 1. Encrypted resolver discovery: Discover encrypted resolvers equivalent to (or associated with) unencrypted resolvers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Discover encrypted resolvers equivalent to (or associated with) unencrypted resolvers.
```

Examples include network-provisioned, client-selected, and VPN-configured resolvers.

> 2. Domain-specific encrypted resolver discovery: Discover encrypted resolvers applicable to a limited set of domains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Discover encrypted resolvers applicable to a limited set of domains.
```

Examples include resolvers for enterprise or private names, local content, and CDN content.

> Encrypted resolver discovery mechanisms can either add new parameters to existing provisioning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resolver upgrade mechanisms can either add new parameters to existing provisioning
```

mechanisms (adding necessary information to use DoT or DoH to options in DHCP, RAs, or IKEv2) or else provide a way
to communicate with a provisioned unencrypted DNS resolver and discover the equivalent or associated encrypted
DNS resolver.

> Domain-specific encrypted resolver discovery mechanisms additionally need to provide some information about the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Domain-specific resolver discovery mechanisms additionally need to provide some information about the
```

> applicability and capabilities of encrypted resolvers. This information could either be provisioned,
> or be discovered based on clients actively trying to access content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
applicability and capabilities of encrypted resolvers. This information can either be provisioned
or can be discovered based on clients actively trying to access content.
```

# Privacy and security requirements {#priv-sec}

> A primary goal of encrypted DNS is improving the privacy and security of DNS queries and answers in the presence

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Encrypted DNS aims to improve the privacy and security of DNS queries and answers in the presence
```

Author: Passive voice!

Reviewer 2: Are you saying "X aims <infinitive>" is more passive than "A goal of X is ___"? That seems backwards to me, but you can always change it to just "Encrypted DNS improves" if you want to be maximally active. :)

Author: "To improve" :) "X improves" is better!

of malicious attackers. Such attackers are assumed to interfere with or otherwise impede DNS traffic and corresponding

> discovery mechanisms. They may be on-path or off-path between the client and entities with which the client

Reviewer 2: RFC3552 contains definitions for these if that's useful to reference

Author: Good point -- I'll add that!

communicates. These attackers can inject, tamper, or otherwise interfere with traffic as needed.
Given these capabilities, an attacker may have a variety of goals, including, though not limited to:

- Monitor and profile clients by observing unencrypted DNS traffic

> - Modify client unencrypted DNS traffic to interfere with or augment the user experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Modify unencrypted DNS traffic to filter or augment the user experience
```

- Block encrypted DNS

> Clients MUST treat the network as such an attacker unless given some means of authenticating or otherwise

Reviewer: As this is an informational document, I was avoiding MUST normative statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients cannot assume that their network does not have such an attacker unless given some means of authenticating or otherwise
```

> trusting the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trusting the communication with their DNS resolver.
```

> Given this type of attacker, discovery mechanisms must be designed carefully to not worsen a client's security or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given this type of attacker, resolver discovery mechanisms must be designed carefully to not worsen a client's security or
```

> privacy posture. In particular, attackers must not be able to:

Reviewer 2: are we MUSTing here (and below)?

Reviewer: This is informational, I don't want normative language

Reviewer 2: Works for me, but should we consider rewording or just leave it? Either is fine

> privacy posture in such networks. In particular, attackers must not be able to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
privacy posture. In particular, attackers must not be able to:
```

- Redirect DNS traffic to themselves.

> - Override or adversely influence client resolver selection by users or administrators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Override or interfere with the resolver preferences of a user or administrator
```
